Marie Curie
Maria Salomea Skłodowska Curie (7 November 1867 – 4 July 1934) was a Polish and naturalised-French physicist and chemist. She shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in Physics with her husband, Pierre Curie, for their joint researches on radioactivity. She won the 1911 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of the elements radium and polonium.
Curie was the first woman to win a Nobel Prize, the first person to win a Nobel Prize twice and the only person to win a Nobel Prize in two different scientific fields. She was the first woman to become a professor at the University of Paris.
Curie was born in Warsaw, where she studied at the clandestine Flying University. In 1891, she followed her sister to study in Paris. In 1895, she married Pierre Curie, with whom she conducted pioneering research on radioactivity—a term she coined. Under Curie's direction, the world's first studies were conducted into the treatment of neoplasms by the use of radioactive isotopes. She founded the Curie Institute in Paris and the Curie Institute in Warsaw. During the First World War, she developed mobile radiography units to provide X-ray services to field hospitals.
New elements
Influenced by the discovery of X-rays and uranium rays, Curie decided to look into uranium radiation as a field of research for a thesis. She hypothesized that the radiation was not the outcome of some interaction of molecules but must come from the atom itself. This hypothesis was an important step in disproving the assumption that atoms were indivisible.
By mid-1898, Pierre Curie decided to drop his work on crystals and join her. In July 1898, they published a joint paper announcing the existence of an element they named 'polonium', in honour of her native Poland. In December 1898, the Curies announced the existence of a second element, which they named 'radium'. The Curies undertook the arduous task of separating out radium salt by differential crystallisation. From a tonne of pitchblende, one-tenth of a gram of radium chloride was separated in 1902. In 1910, she isolated pure radium metal.
World War I
During World War I, Curie recognised that wounded soldiers were best served if operated upon as soon as possible. She saw a need for field radiological centres. After a quick study of radiology and anatomy, she developed mobile radiography units, which came to be known as "Little Curies." She became the director of the Red Cross Radiology Service. It is estimated that over a million wounded soldiers were treated with her X-ray units.
Curie died in 1934 of aplastic anaemia, likely from exposure to radiation in the course of her scientific research and her radiological work during the war. In 1995, she became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the Paris Panthéon.