Srinivasa Ramanujan Iyengar (22 December 1887 – 26 April 1920) was an Indian mathematician who made substantial contributions to mathematical analysis, number theory, infinite series, and continued fractions. Ramanujan initially developed his own mathematical research in isolation. Seeking mathematicians who could better understand his work, in 1913 he began a mail correspondence with the English mathematician G. H. Hardy at the University of Cambridge. Recognising Ramanujan's work as extraordinary, Hardy arranged for him to travel to Cambridge.
Throughout his life, Ramanujan independently compiled nearly 3,900 results. Many were completely novel; his original and highly unconventional results, such as the Raman prime, the Raman theta function, partition formulae and mock theta functions, have opened entire new areas of work. Most of his results have since been proven correct. He became one of the youngest Fellows of the Royal Society and the first Indian to be elected a Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
Early life
Ramanujan was born into a Tamil Brahmin Iyengar family in Erode, Madras Presidency. A child prodigy by age 11, he had exhausted the mathematical knowledge of college lodgers at his home. At 16, he obtained a copy of Carr's Synopsis of Elementary Results in Pure and Applied Mathematics, which he studied in great detail. He failed his college exams because he was so intent on mathematics that he neglected all other subjects. Living in extreme poverty, he continued his independent research.
Adulthood and Career
In 1910, Ramanujan met V. Ramaswamy Aiyer, founder of the Indian Mathematical Society. With his help, Ramanujan began to receive recognition in Madras's mathematical circles. In 1912, he obtained a clerical position at the Madras Port Trust, where his boss and colleagues encouraged his research.
His 1913 letter to G.H. Hardy included nine pages of mathematics that Hardy initially viewed as a possible fraud. However, Hardy soon realized Ramanujan was a "mathematician of the highest quality." Ramanujan traveled to England in 1914. Their collaboration was a clash of cultures; Hardy was an atheist and an apostle of proof, while Ramanujan was deeply religious and relied on intuition.
Mathematical Achievements
Ramanujan's series for pi converges extraordinarily rapidly and forms the basis of some of the fastest algorithms used today. He is famous for the Hardy-Ramanujan number 1729. When Hardy visited him in the hospital and mentioned that his taxi number was "dull," Ramanujan replied, "No, it is a very interesting number; it is the smallest number expressible as the sum of two cubes in two different ways" (1^3 + 12^3 and 9^3 + 10^3).
Illness and Death
Ramanujan's health worsened in England due to the difficulty of keeping his religious dietary requirements and wartime rationing. He was diagnosed with tuberculosis and vitamin deficiency. He returned to India in 1919 and died in 1920 at the age of 32. Later analysis suggests he likely suffered from hepatic amoebiasis. His "lost notebook," containing discoveries from his final year, was rediscovered in 1976.
