Carl Linnaeus
Carl Linnaeus (23 May 1707 – 10 January 1778), also known after ennoblement in 1761 as Carl von Linné, was a Swedish biologist and physician who formalised binomial nomenclature, the modern system of naming organisms. He is known as the "father of modern taxonomy". Many of his writings were in Latin; his name is rendered in Latin as Carolus Linnæus and, after his 1761 ennoblement, as Carolus a Linné.
Linnaeus was the son of a curate and was born in Råshult, in the countryside of Småland, southern Sweden. He received most of his higher education at Uppsala University and began giving lectures in botany there in 1730. He lived abroad between 1735 and 1738, where he studied and also published the first edition of his Systema Naturae in the Netherlands. He then returned to Sweden where he became professor of medicine and botany at Uppsala. In the 1740s, he was sent on several journeys through Sweden to find and classify plants and animals. In the 1750s and 1760s, he continued to collect and classify animals, plants, and minerals, while publishing several volumes. By the time of his death in 1778, he was one of the most acclaimed scientists in Europe.
Linnaeus has been called Princeps botanicorum (Prince of Botanists) and "The Pliny of the North". He is also considered one of the founders of modern ecology. In botany, the abbreviation L. is used to indicate Linnaeus as the authority for a species' name. In zoology, the abbreviation Linnaeus is generally used. Linnaeus is designated as the type specimen for the human species, Homo sapiens.
Early life
Linnaeus was born in the village of Råshult in Småland, Sweden, on 23 May 1707. He was the first child of Nicolaus (Nils) Linnaeus and Christina Brodersonia. His father taught him Latin as a small child. Nils was an amateur botanist, a Lutheran minister, and the curate of the village of Stenbrohult. Even in his early years, Linnaeus seemed to have a liking for plants, flowers in particular. Soon Linnaeus was given his own patch of land where he could grow plants.
Carl's father adopted the Latinate name Linnæus after a giant lime tree, lind in Swedish, that grew on the family homestead. Carl's patronymic would have been Nilsson, as in Carl Nilsson Linnæus. Linnaeus entered the Växjö Katedralskola in 1724. His headmaster introduced him to Johan Rothman, the state doctor, who broadened Linnaeus's interest in botany and helped him develop an interest in medicine.
Expedition to Lapland
In 1732, Linnaeus was awarded a grant for a journey to Lapland. His hope was to find new plants, animals and possibly valuable minerals. He was also curious about the customs of the native Sami people. Linnaeus began his expedition from Uppsala on 12 May 1732. He travelled on foot and horse, bringing with him his journal and botanical manuscripts. He returned from his six-month-long expedition in October, having gathered and observed many plants, birds and rocks. Linnaeus described about 100 previously unidentified plants. These became the basis of his book Flora Lapponica.