Erwin Schrödinger
Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrödinger (12 August 1887 – 4 January 1961) was an Austrian theoretical physicist who developed fundamental results in quantum theory. In particular, he is recognized for devising the Schrödinger equation, an equation that provides a way to calculate the wave function of a system and how it changes dynamically in time. He coined the term "quantum entanglement" in 1935. Schrödinger shared the 1933 Nobel Prize in Physics with Paul Dirac "for the discovery of new productive forms of atomic theory".
In addition, Schrödinger wrote many works on various aspects of physics: statistical mechanics and thermodynamics, physics of dielectrics, color theory, electrodynamics, general relativity, and cosmology, and he made several attempts to construct a unified field theory. In his book, What Is Life?, Schrödinger addressed the problems of genetics, looking at the phenomenon of life from the point of view of physics. He also paid great attention to the philosophical aspects of science, ancient and oriental philosophical concepts, ethics, and religion. He also wrote on philosophy and theoretical biology. In popular culture, he is best known for "Schrödinger's cat", a thought experiment. He and Dirac tied for eighth in a Physics World poll of the greatest physicists of all time.
In his personal life, he lived with both his wife and his mistress which may have led to problems causing him to leave his position at Oxford. Subsequently, until 1938, he had a position in Graz, Austria, until the Anschluss when he fled, finally finding a long-term arrangement in Dublin, Ireland, where he remained until retirement in 1955. He returned to Vienna in 1956, with an emeritus professor position, and died of tuberculosis in 1961. In 1989, allegations of sexual abuse of several minors emerged. In 2026, a defence was published challenging some of these allegations.
Early life and education
Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrödinger was born on 12 August 1887 in Vienna, the only child of Rudolf Schrödinger, a botanist, and Georgine Emilia Brenda Bauer, the daughter of a chemistry professor at TU Wien. His mother was of half Austrian and half English descent. His father was Catholic and his mother was Lutheran. Although Schrödinger was an atheist, he had strong interests in Eastern religions and pantheism, and used religious symbolism in his works. He believed his scientific work was an approach to divinity in an intellectual sense.
Schrödinger was also able to learn English outside school, as his maternal grandmother was British. From 1906 to 1910, he studied under Franz S. Exner and Friedrich Hasenöhrl at the University of Vienna. He received his Ph.D. under Hasenöhrl in 1910. He also conducted experimental work with Karl Wilhelm Friedrich "Fritz" Kohlrausch. The following year, he became an assistant to Exner, under whom he completed his habilitation in 1914.
Max Planck
Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck (23 April 1858 – 4 October 1947) was a German theoretical physicist. He was awarded the 1918 Nobel Prize in Physics "for the services he rendered to the advancement of physics by his discovery of energy quanta".
Planck made many contributions to theoretical physics, primarily in his role as the originator of quantum theory and one of the founders of modern physics, which revolutionized understanding of atomic and subatomic processes. He is known for the Planck constant, h, which is of foundational importance for quantum physics, and which he used to derive a set of units, now called Planck units, expressed in terms of physical constants. The Planck relation, E= hv, states that the energy of a photon is proportional to its frequency.
Planck was twice President of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society. In 1948 it was renamed the Max Planck Society, and today includes 83 institutions representing a wide range of scientific disciplines.
Early life and education
Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck was born on 23 April 1858 in Kiel, the son of Johann Julius Wilhelm Planck and his second wife, Emma Patzig. He was baptized with the name of Karl Ernst Ludwig Marx Planck; of his given names, Marx was indicated as the appellation name. However, by the age of ten he signed with the name Max and used this for the rest of his life.
Planck came from a traditional, intellectual family. His paternal great-grandfather and grandfather were both theology professors at the University of Göttingen; his father was a law professor at Kiel University and the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München. One of his uncles was also a judge. Planck was the sixth child in the family, though two of his siblings were from his father's first marriage. War was common during Planck's early years and among his earliest memories was the marching of Prussian and Austrian troops into Kiel during the Second Schleswig War in 1864.
In 1867, the family moved to Munich, where Planck enrolled at Maximiliansgymnasium. There, his mathematical talents emerged early and he later came under the tutelage of Hermann Müller, a mathematician who took an interest in the youth, and taught him astronomy and mechanics as well as mathematics. It was from Müller that Planck first learned the law of conservation of energy. This is how Planck first came in contact with the field of physics. Planck graduated early, at age 17. Planck was gifted in music; he took singing lessons and played piano, organ and cello, and composed songs and operas.
