Louis Pasteur (27 December 1822 – 28 September 1895) was a French chemist, pharmacist, and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation, and pasteurization, the last of which was named after him. His research in chemistry led to remarkable breakthroughs in the understanding of the causes and prevention of diseases, which laid down the foundations of hygiene, public health and much of modern medicine. Pasteur's works are credited with saving millions of lives through the development of vaccines for rabies and anthrax. He is regarded as one of the founders of modern bacteriology and has been honored as the "father of bacteriology" and the "father of microbiology."
Pasteur was responsible for disproving the doctrine of spontaneous generation. Under the auspices of the French Academy of Sciences, his experiment demonstrated that in sterilized and sealed flasks, nothing ever developed; conversely, in sterilized but open flasks, microorganisms could grow. For this experiment, the academy awarded him the Alhumbert Prize in 1862.
Pasteur is also regarded as one of the fathers of the germ theory of diseases, which was a minor medical concept at the time. His many experiments showed that diseases could be prevented by killing or stopping germs, thereby directly supporting the germ theory and its application in clinical medicine. He is best known to the general public for his invention of the technique of treating milk and wine to stop bacterial contamination, a process now called pasteurization. Pasteur also made significant discoveries in chemistry, most notably on the molecular basis for the asymmetry of certain crystals and racemization. Early in his career, his investigation of sodium ammonium tartrate initiated the field of optical isomerism.
He was the director of the Pasteur Institute, established in 1887, until his death. Although Pasteur made groundbreaking experiments, his reputation became associated with various controversies. Historical reassessment of his notebook revealed that he practiced deception to overcome his rivals.
Early life and education
Louis Pasteur was born on 27 December 1822, in Dole, Jura, France, to a Catholic family of a poor tanner. He was the third child of Jean-Joseph Pasteur and Jeanne-Etiennette Roqui. The family moved to Marnoz in 1826 and then to Arbois in 1827. Pasteur entered primary school in 1831. He was an average student in his early years, and not particularly academic, as his interests were fishing and sketching. He drew many pastels and portraits of his parents, friends and neighbors.
In 1839, he entered the College Royal at Besancon to study philosophy and earned his Bachelor of Letters degree in 1840. He managed to pass the baccalauréat scientifique degree from Dijon, where he earned his Bachelor of Science in Mathematics degree in 1842, but with a mediocre grade in chemistry. In 1843, he entered the École Normale Supérieure. In 1845 he received the licencié ès sciences degree. In 1847, he submitted his two theses, one in chemistry and the other in physics.
Fermentation and germ theory of diseases
Pasteur was motivated to investigate fermentation while working at Lille. In 1856 a local wine manufacturer sought his advice on the problems of making beetroot alcohol and souring. Pasteur demonstrated that yeast was responsible for fermentation to produce alcohol from sugar. He also demonstrated that, when a different microorganism contaminated the wine, lactic acid was produced, making the wine sour. He invented a process in which liquids such as milk were heated to a temperature between 60 and 100 degrees Celsius to kill bacteria and moulds. The method became known as pasteurization.
Immunology and vaccination
Pasteur's first work on vaccine development was on chicken cholera. He discovered that bacteria weakened by contact with oxygen could be used as a vaccine, introducing the term "attenuation" for this weakening of virulence. He utilized this method to create a vaccine for anthrax, which affected cattle. In 1881, he conducted a famous public experiment at Pouilly-le-Fort, where he successfully vaccinated sheep against anthrax.
His laboratory produced the first vaccine for rabies. The vaccine was famously used on 9-year-old Joseph Meister in 1885, after the boy was badly mauled by a rabid dog. Over 11 days, Meister received 13 inoculations and survived. This success laid the foundations for the manufacture of many other vaccines and the establishment of the Pasteur Institute.