Dmitri Mendeleev
Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev (8 February 1834 – 2 February 1907) was a Russian chemist known for formulating the periodic law and creating a version of the periodic table of elements. He used the periodic law not only to correct the then-accepted properties of some known elements, such as the valence and atomic weight of uranium, but also to predict the properties of three elements that were yet to be discovered (germanium, gallium, and scandium). The synthetic element mendelevium is named in his honor.
Early life
Mendeleev was born in the village of Verkhnie Aremzyani, near Tobolsk in Siberia, to Ivan Pavlovich Mendeleev (1783–1847) and Maria Dmitrievna Mendeleeva (née Kornilieva) (1793–1850). Ivan worked as a school principal and a teacher of fine arts, politics and philosophy. Maria Kornilieva came from a well-known family of Tobolsk merchants. Mendeleev was raised as an Orthodox Christian, though his son Ivan would later inform that Mendeleev had departed from the Church and embraced a form of "romanticized deism".
Mendeleev was the youngest of 17 siblings. Unfortunately for the family's financial well-being, his father became blind and lost his teaching position. His mother was forced to work and she restarted her family's abandoned glass factory. At the age of 13, after the death of his father and the destruction of his mother's factory by fire, Mendeleev attended the Gymnasium in Tobolsk.
In 1849, his mother took Mendeleev across Russia from Siberia to Moscow with the aim of getting Mendeleev enrolled at the Moscow University. The university in Moscow did not accept him. They continued to Saint Petersburg to his father's alma mater, the Main Pedagogical Institute, which he entered in 1850. After graduation, he contracted tuberculosis, causing him to move to the Crimean Peninsula in 1855. In 1857, he returned to Saint Petersburg with restored health.
Periodic table
In 1863, there were 56 known elements. Mendeleev wrote Principles of Chemistry, which became the definitive textbook of its time. As he attempted to classify the elements according to their chemical properties, he noticed patterns that led him to postulate his periodic table; he claimed to have envisioned the complete arrangement of the elements in a dream: "I saw in a dream a table where all elements fell into place as required. Awakening, I immediately wrote it down on a piece of paper."
On 6 March 1869, he made a formal presentation to the Russian Chemical Society, titled The Dependence between the Properties of the Atomic Weights of the Elements. Mendeleev has the distinction of accurately predicting the properties of ekasilicon, ekaaluminium and ekaboron (germanium, gallium and scandium). Mendeleev also proposed changes in the properties of some known elements, such as uranium. By using Sanskrit prefixes to name "missing" elements, Mendeleev may have recorded his debt to the Sanskrit grammarians of ancient India. Dmitri Mendeleev is often referred to as the Father of the Periodic Table.
Later life
In 1876, he met Anna Ivanovna Popova and began courting her. His divorce from his first wife, Leshcheva, was finalized one month after he had married Popova in 1882. Mendeleev also investigated the composition of petroleum and helped to found the first oil refinery in Russia. He is credited with a remark that burning petroleum as a fuel "would be akin to firing up a kitchen stove with bank notes".
Mendeleev was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the last three years of his life. In 1906, the Nobel Committee recommended awarding the prize to Mendeleev, but he was rejected by the Swedish Academy, partly due to influence from Svante Arrhenius. Mendeleev died in 1907 at the age of 72 in Saint Petersburg from influenza. His last words were to his physician: "Doctor, you have science, I have faith."
