J. J. Thomson
Sir Joseph John Thomson (18 December 1856 – 30 August 1940) was a British physicist. He received the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physics "in recognition of the great merits of his theoretical and experimental investigations on the conduction of electricity by gases." In 1897, he showed that cathode rays were composed of previously unknown negatively charged particles (now called electrons), which he calculated must have bodies much smaller than atoms and a very large charge-to-mass ratio. The electron was the first subatomic particle to be discovered.
Thomson is credited with finding the first evidence for isotopes of a stable (non-radioactive) element in 1912, as part of his exploration into the composition of canal rays (positive ions). His experiments to determine the nature of positively charged particles, with Francis William Aston, were the first use of mass spectrometry and led to the development of the mass spectrograph.
Thomson was an influential teacher, and seven of his students went on to win Nobel Prizes: Ernest Rutherford (Chemistry 1908), Lawrence Bragg (Physics 1915), Charles Barkla (Physics 1917), Francis Aston (Chemistry 1922), Charles Thomson Rees Wilson (Physics 1927), Owen Richardson (Physics 1928) and Edward Appleton (Physics 1947). His son, George Paget Thomson, shared the 1937 Nobel Prize in Physics with Clinton Davisson "for their experimental discovery of the diffraction of electrons by crystals".
Biography
Joseph John Thomson was born on 18 December 1856 in Cheetham Hill, Manchester. His mother, Emma Swindells, came from a local textile family. His father, Joseph James Thomson, ran an antiquarian bookshop founded by Thomson's great-grandfather. Joseph John had a brother, Frederick Vernon Thomson, who was two years younger than he was. Thomson was a reserved yet devout Anglican.
Education
Thomson's early education was in small private schools where he demonstrated outstanding talent and interest in science. In 1870, he was admitted to Owens College in Manchester (now the University of Manchester) at the unusually young age of 14, and came under the influence of Balfour Stewart, Professor of Physics, who initiated him into physical research. He began experimenting with contact electrification and soon published his first scientific paper. His parents planned to enroll him as an apprentice engineer to Sharp, Stewart & Co, a locomotive manufacturer, but these plans were cut short when his father died in 1873.
In 1876, Thomson moved on to Trinity College, Cambridge. In 1880, he received his B.A. in mathematics (Second Wrangler in the Tripos and 2nd Smith's Prizeman). He applied for and became a Fellow of Trinity College the following year. He obtained an M.A. (Adams Prizeman) in 1883.
Career
On 22 December 1884, Thomson was appointed Cavendish Professor of Physics at the University of Cambridge. This appointment caused considerable surprise; candidates such as Osborne Reynolds and Richard Glazebrook were older and more experienced in laboratory work, whereas Thomson was known for his work as a mathematician—being recognised as an exceptional talent.
Thomson was knighted in 1908 and appointed to the Order of Merit in 1912. At Oxford, he gave the 1914 Romanes Lecture titled The Atomic Theory. In 1918, he became Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, a position he held until his death on 30 August 1940. His ashes rest in Westminster Abbey, near the graves of Isaac Newton and his former student, Ernest Rutherford.
