Antoine Lavoisier
Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier (26 August 1743 – 8 May 1794) was a French nobleman and chemist who was central to the 18th-century chemical revolution and who had a large influence on both the history of chemistry and the history of biology. It is generally accepted that Lavoisier's great accomplishments in chemistry stem largely from his changing the science from a qualitative to a quantitative one.
Lavoisier is noted for his discovery of the role oxygen plays in combustion, opposing the prior phlogiston theory. He named oxygen (1778) and also recognized hydrogen as an element (1783). By using more precise measurements than previous experimenters, he confirmed the law of conservation of mass, which led to the development of the balanced physical and chemical reaction equations that we still use today.
Lavoisier helped construct the metric system, wrote the first extensive list of elements, and helped to reform chemical nomenclature. His wife and laboratory assistant, Marie-Anne Paulze Lavoisier, became a renowned chemist in her own right and worked with him to develop the metric system. Lavoisier was a powerful member of the Ferme générale, a tax-farming financial company. At the height of the French Revolution, he was charged with tax fraud and selling adulterated tobacco, and was guillotined despite appeals to spare his life in recognition of his contributions to science.
Early life and education
Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier was born to a wealthy family of the nobility in Paris. He began his schooling at the Collège des Quatre-Nations in 1754. He studied chemistry, botany, astronomy, and mathematics. Lavoisier entered the school of law, where he received a degree in 1764, though he never practiced as a lawyer.
In 1775 he was made one of four commissioners of gunpowder. As a result of his efforts, both the quantity and quality of French gunpowder greatly improved, and it became a source of revenue for the government. Lavoisier was a formative influence in the formation of the Du Pont gunpowder business because he trained Éleuthère Irénée du Pont, its founder, on gunpowder-making in France.
Chemical revolution
Lavoisier's fundamental contributions to chemistry were a result of a conscious effort to fit all experiments into the framework of a single theory. He established the consistent use of the chemical balance and used oxygen to overthrow the phlogiston theory. He also did early research in physical chemistry and thermodynamics. He established that water was not an element, as had been thought for over 2,000 years, but a compound of two gases, hydrogen and oxygen. His Traité élémentaire de chimie (Elementary Treatise on Chemistry), published in 1789, is considered the first modern textbook on the subject.