Galileo Galilei
Galileo di Vincenzo Bonaiuti de' Galilei (15 February 1564 – 8 January 1642), commonly referred to as Galileo Galilei or mononymously as Galileo, was an Italian astronomer, physicist, engineer and polymath. He was born in Pisa, then part of the Duchy of Florence. Galileo has been called the father of observational astronomy, classical physics, the scientific method, and modern science.
He studied speed and velocity, gravity and free fall, the principle of relativity, inertia, projectile motion, and also worked in applied science and technology, describing the properties of the pendulum and "hydrostatic balances". He was one of the earliest developers of the thermoscope and the inventor of various military compasses. With an improved telescope he built, he observed the stars of the Milky Way, the phases of Venus, the four largest satellites of Jupiter, Saturn's rings, lunar craters, and sunspots. He also built an early microscope.
Galileo's championing of Copernican heliocentrism was met with opposition from within the Catholic Church and from some astronomers. The matter was investigated by the Roman Inquisition in 1615, which concluded that his opinions contradicted accepted Biblical interpretations. Galileo defended his views in Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632), which appeared to dispute and satirize Pope Urban VIII, thus alienating both the Pope and the Jesuits, who had both strongly supported Galileo until this point. He was tried by the Inquisition, found "vehemently suspect of heresy", and forced to recant. He spent the rest of his life under house arrest. During this time, he wrote Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences (1638) primarily about kinematics and the strength of materials.
Early life and family
Galileo was born in Pisa on 15 February 1564, the first of six children of Vincenzo Galilei, a leading lutenist, composer, and music theorist, and Giulia Ammannati, the daughter of a prominent merchant. Vincenzo was part of the Florentine Camerata, which laid the groundwork for the new genre of opera. Galileo became an accomplished lutenist himself. Three of Galileo's five siblings survived infancy. The youngest, Michelangelo, also became a lutenist and composer who added to Galileo's financial burdens for the rest of his life.
When Galileo Galilei was eight, his family moved to Florence. He was educated, particularly in logic, from 1575 to 1578 in the Vallombrosa Abbey, about 30 km southeast of Florence. Galileo tended to refer to himself by his first name. At the time, surnames were optional in Italy. The Italian male given name "Galileo" derives from the Latin "Galilaeus", meaning "of Galilee".
Children
Though a pious Catholic, Galileo fathered three children out of wedlock with Marina Gamba: daughters Virginia (b. 1600) and Livia (1601), and a son Vincenzo (1606). Due to their illegitimate birth, Galileo considered the girls unmarriageable, requiring expensive support or exorbitant dowries. Their only respectable alternative was the religious life: they became lifelong nuns in the convent of San Matteo in Arcetri. Virginia took the name Maria Celeste upon entering the convent. She died on 2 April 1634, and is buried with Galileo at the Basilica of Santa Croce, Florence.